<h2>
      THE GIFTS OF THE CHILD CHRIST.
</h2>

<h2>
      CHAPTER I.
    </h2>
<p>
      "My hearers, we grow old," said the preacher. "Be it summer or be it
      spring with us now, autumn will soon settle down into winter, that winter
      whose snow melts only in the grave. The wind of the world sets for the
      tomb. Some of us rejoice to be swept along on its swift wings, and hear it
      bellowing in the hollows of earth and sky; but it will grow a terror to
      the man of trembling limb and withered brain, until at length he will long
      for the shelter of the tomb to escape its roaring and buffeting. Happy the
      man who shall then be able to believe that old age itself, with its
      pitiable decays and sad dreams of youth, is the chastening of the Lord, a
      sure sign of his love and his fatherhood."
    </p>
<p>
      It was the first Sunday in Advent; but "the chastening of the Lord" came
      into almost every sermon that man preached.
    </p>
<p>
      "Eloquent! But after all, <i>can</i> this kind of thing be true?" said to
      himself a man of about thirty, who sat decorously listening. For many
      years he had thought he believed this kind of thing—but of late he
      was not so sure.
    </p>
<p>
      Beside him sat his wife, in her new winter bonnet, her pretty face turned
      up toward the preacher; but her eyes—nothing else—revealed
      that she was not listening. She was much younger than her husband—hardly
      twenty, indeed.
    </p>
<p>
      In the upper corner of the pew sat a pale-faced child about five, sucking
      her thumb, and staring at the preacher.
    </p>
<p>
      The sermon over, they walked home in proximity. The husband looked gloomy,
      and his eyes sought the ground. The wife looked more smiling than
      cheerful, and her pretty eyes went hither and thither. Behind them walked
      the child—steadily, "with level-fronting eyelids."
    </p>
<p>
      It was a late-built region of large, common-place houses, and at one of
      them they stopped and entered. The door of the dining-room was open,
      showing the table laid for their Sunday dinner. The gentleman passed on to
      the library behind it, the lady went up to her bedroom, and the child a
      stage higher to the nursery.
    </p>
<p>
      It wanted half an hour to dinner. Mr. Greatorex sat down, drummed with his
      fingers on the arm of his easy-chair, took up a book of arctic
      exploration, threw it again on the table, got up, and went to the
      smoking-room. He had built it for his wife's sake, but was often glad of
      it for his own. Again he seated himself, took a cigar, and smoked
      gloomily.
    </p>
<p>
      Having reached her bedroom, Mrs. Greatorex took off her bonnet, and stood
      for ten minutes turning it round and round. Earnestly she regarded it—now
      gave a twist to the wire-stem of a flower, then spread wider the loop of a
      bow. She was meditating what it lacked of perfection rather than brooding
      over its merits: she was keen in bonnets.
    </p>
<p>
      Little Sophy—or, as she called herself by a transposition of
      consonant sounds common with children, Phosy—found her nurse Alice
      in the nursery. But she was lost in the pages of a certain London weekly,
      which had found her in a mood open to its influences, and did not even
      look up when the child entered. With some effort Phosy drew off her
      gloves, and with more difficulty untied her hat. Then she took off her
      jacket, smoothed her hair, and retreated to a corner. There a large shabby
      doll lay upon her little chair: she took it up, disposed it gently upon
      the bed, seated herself in its place, got a little book from where she had
      left it under the chair, smoothed down her skirts, and began
      simultaneously to read and suck her thumb. The book was an unhealthy one,
      a cup filled to the brim with a poverty-stricken and selfish religion:
      such are always breaking out like an eruption here and there over the body
      of the Church, doing their part, doubtless, in carrying off the evil
      humours generated by poverty of blood, or the congestion of
      self-preservation. It is wonderful out of what spoiled fruit some children
      will suck sweetness.
    </p>
<p>
      But she did not read far: her thoughts went back to a phrase which had
      haunted her ever since first she went to church: "Whom the Lord loveth, he
      chasteneth."
    </p>
<p>
      "I wish he would chasten me," she thought for the hundredth time.
    </p>
<p>
      The small Christian had no suspicion that her whole life had been a period
      of chastening—that few children indeed had to live in such a sunless
      atmosphere as hers.
    </p>
<p>
      Alice threw down the newspaper, gazed from the window into the back-yard
      of the next house, saw nothing but an elderly man-servant brushing a
      garment, and turned upon Sophy.
    </p>
<p>
      "Why don't you hang up your jacket, miss?" she said, sharply.
    </p>
<p>
      The little one rose, opened the wardrobe-door wide, carried a chair to it,
      fetched her jacket from the bed, clambered up on the chair, and, leaning
      far forward to reach a peg, tumbled right into the bottom of the wardrobe.
    </p>
<p>
      "You clumsy!" exclaimed the nurse angrily, and pulling her out by the arm,
      shook her.
    </p>
<p>
      Alice was not generally rough to her, but there were reasons to-day.
    </p>
<p>
      Phosy crept back to her seat, pale, frightened, and a little hurt. Alice
      hung up the jacket, closed the wardrobe, and, turning, contemplated her
      own pretty face and neat figure in the glass opposite. The dinner-bell
      rang.
    </p>
<p>
      "There, I declare!" she cried, and wheeled round on Phosy. "And your hair
      not brushed yet, miss! Will you ever learn to do a thing without being
      told it? Thank goodness, I shan't be plagued with you long! But I pity her
      as comes after me: I do!"
    </p>
<p>
      "If the Lord would but chasten me!" said the child to herself, as she rose
      and laid down her book with a sigh.
    </p>
<p>
      The maid seized her roughly by the arm, and brushed her hair with an angry
      haste that made the child's eyes water, and herself feel a little ashamed
      at the sight of them.
    </p>
<p>
      "How could anybody love such a troublesome chit?" she said, seeking the
      comfort of justification from the child herself.
    </p>
<p>
      Another sigh was the poor little damsel's only answer. She looked very
      white and solemn as she entered the dining-room.
    </p>
<p>
      Mr. Greatorex was a merchant in the City. But he was more of a man than a
      merchant, which all merchants are not. Also, he was more scrupulous in his
      dealings than some merchants in the same line of business, who yet stood
      as well with the world as he; but, on the other hand, he had the meanness
      to pride himself upon it as if it had been something he might have done
      without and yet held up his head.
    </p>
<p>
      Some six years before, he had married to please his parents; and a year
      before, he had married to please himself. His first wife had intellect,
      education, and heart, but little individuality—not enough to reflect
      the individuality of her husband. The consequence was, he found her
      uninteresting. He was kind and indulgent however, and not even her best
      friend blamed him much for manifesting nothing beyond the average devotion
      of husbands. But in truth his wife had great capabilities, only they had
      never ripened, and when she died, a fortnight after giving birth to Sophy,
      her husband had not a suspicion of the large amount of undeveloped power
      that had passed away with her.
    </p>
<p>
      Her child was so like her both in countenance and manner that he was too
      constantly reminded of her unlamented mother; and he loved neither enough
      to discover that, in a sense as true as marvellous, the child was the very
      flower-bud of her mother's nature, in which her retarded blossom had yet a
      chance of being slowly carried to perfection. Love alone gives insight,
      and the father took her merely for a miniature edition of the volume which
      he seemed to have laid aside for ever in the dust of the earth's
      lumber-room. Instead, therefore, of watering the roots of his little human
      slip from the well of his affections, he had scarcely as yet perceived
      more in relation to her than that he was legally accountable for her
      existence, and bound to give her shelter and food. If he had questioned
      himself on the matter, he would have replied that love was not wanting,
      only waiting upon her growth, and the development of something to interest
      him.
    </p>
<p>
      Little right as he had had to expect anything from his first marriage, he
      had yet cherished some hopes therein—tolerably vague, it is true,
      yet hardly faint enough, it would seem, for he was disappointed in them.
      When its bonds fell from him, however, he flattered himself that he had
      not worn them in vain, but had through them arrived at a knowledge of
      women as rare as profound. But whatever the reach of this knowledge, it
      was not sufficient to prevent him from harbouring the presumptuous hope of
      so choosing and so fashioning the heart and mind of a woman that they
      should be as concave mirrors to his own. I do not mean that he would have
      admitted the figure, but such was really the end he blindly sought. I
      wonder how many of those who have been disappointed in such an attempt
      have been thereby aroused to the perception of what a frightful failure
      their success would have been on both sides. It was bad enough that
      Augustus Greatorex's theories had cramped his own development; it would
      have been ten-fold worse had they been operative to the stunting of
      another soul.
    </p>
<p>
      Letty Merewether was the daughter of a bishop <i>in partibus</i>. She had
      been born tolerably innocent, had grown up more than tolerably pretty, and
      was, when she came to England at the age of sixteen, as nearly a genuine
      example of Locke's sheet of white paper as could well have fallen to the
      hand of such an experimenter as Greatorex would fain become.
    </p>
<p>
      In his suit he had prospered—perhaps too easily. He loved the girl,
      or at least loved the modified reflection of her in his own mind; while
      she, thoroughly admiring the dignity, good looks, and accomplishments of
      the man whose attentions flattered her self-opinion, accorded him
      deference enough to encourage his vainest hopes. Although she knew little,
      fluttering over the merest surfaces of existence, she had sense enough to
      know that he talked sense to her, and foolishness enough to put it down to
      her own credit, while for the sense itself she cared little or nothing.
      And Greatorex, without even knowing what she was rough-hewn for, would
      take upon him to shape her ends!—an ambition the Divinity never
      permits to succeed: he who fancies himself the carver finds himself but
      the chisel, or indeed perhaps only the mallet, in the hand of the true
      workman.
    </p>
<p>
      During the days of his courtship, then, Letty listened and smiled, or
      answered with what he took for a spiritual response, when it was merely a
      brain-echo. Looking down into the pond of her being, whose surface was,
      not yet ruffled by any bubbling of springs from below, he saw the
      reflection of himself and was satisfied. An able man on his hobby looks a
      centaur of wisdom and folly; but if he be at all a wise man, the beast
      will one day or other show him the jade's favour of unseating him.
      Meantime Augustus Greatorex was fooled, not by poor little Letty, who was
      not capable of fooling him, but by himself. Letty had made no pretences;
      had been interested, and had shown her interest; had understood, or seemed
      to understand, what he said to her, and forgotten it the next moment—had
      no pocket to put it in, did not know what to do with it, and let it drop
      into the Limbo of Vanity. They had not been married many days before the
      scouts of advancing disappointment were upon them. Augustus resisted
      manfully for a time. But the truth was each of the two had to become a
      great deal more than either was, before any approach to unity was
      possible. He tried to interest her in one subject after another—tried
      her first, I am ashamed to say, with political economy. In that instance,
      when he came home to dinner he found that she had not got beyond the first
      page of the book he had left with her. But she had the best of excuses,
      namely, that of that page she had not understood a sentence. He saw his
      mistake, and tried her with poetry. But Milton, with whom unfortunately he
      commenced his approaches, was to her, if not equally unintelligible,
      equally uninteresting. He tried her next with the elements of science, but
      with no better success. He returned to poetry, and read some of the Faerie
      Queene with her: she was, or seemed to be, interested in all his talk
      about it, and inclined to go on with it in his absence, but found the
      first stanza she tried more than enough without him to give life to it.
      She could give it none, and therefore it gave her none. I believe she read
      a chapter of the Bible every day, but the only books she read with any
      real interest were novels of a sort that Augustus despised. It never
      occurred to him that he ought at once to have made friends of this Momus
      of unrighteousness, for by them he might have found entrance to the sealed
      chamber. He ought to have read with her the books she did like, for by
      them only could he make her think, and from them alone could he lead her
      to better. It is but from the very step upon which one stands that one can
      move to the next. Besides these books, there was nothing in her scheme of
      the universe but fashion, dress, calls, the park, other-peopledom,
      concerts, plays, churchgoing—whatever could show itself on the
      frosted glass of her <i>camera obscura</i>—make an interest of
      motion and colour in her darkened chamber. Without these, her bosom's
      mistress would have found life unendurable, for not yet had she ascended
      her throne, but lay on the floor of her nursery, surrounded with toys that
      imitated life.
    </p>
<p>
      It was no wonder, therefore, that Augustus was at length compelled to
      allow himself disappointed. That it was the fault of his self-confidence
      made the thing no whit better. He was too much of a man not to cherish a
      certain tenderness for her, but he soon found to his dismay that it had
      begun to be mingled with a shadow of contempt. Against this he struggled,
      but with fluctuating success. He stopped later and later at business, and
      when he came home spent more and more of his time in the smoking-room,
      where by and by he had bookshelves put up. Occasionally he would accept an
      invitation to dinner and accompany his wife, but he detested evening
      parties, and when Letty, who never refused an invitation if she could help
      it, went to one, he remained at home with his books. But his power of
      reading began to diminish. He became restless and irritable. Something
      kept gnawing at his heart. There was a sore spot in it. The spot grew
      larger and larger, and by degrees the centre of his consciousness came to
      be a soreness: his cherished idea had been fooled; he had taken a silly
      girl for a woman of undeveloped wealth;—a bubble, a surface whereon
      fair colours chased each other, for a hearted crystal.
    </p>
<p>
      On her part, Letty too had her grief, which, unlike Augustus, she did not
      keep to herself, receiving in return from more than one of her friends the
      soothing assurance that Augustus was only like all other men; that women
      were but their toys, which they cast away when weary of them. Letty did
      not see that she was herself making a toy of her life, or that Augustus
      was right in refusing to play with such a costly and delicate thing.
      Neither did Augustus see that, having, by his own blunder, married a mere
      child, he was bound to deal with her as one, and not let the child suffer
      for his fault more than what could not be helped. It is not by pressing
      our insights upon them, but by bathing the sealed eyelids of the human
      kittens, that we can help them.
    </p>
<p>
      And all the time poor little Phosy was left to the care of Alice, a
      clever, careless, good-hearted, self-satisfied damsel, who, although
      seldom so rough in her behaviour as we have just seen her, abandoned the
      child almost entirely to her own resources. It was often she sat alone in
      the nursery, wishing the Lord would chasten her—because then he
      would love her.
    </p>
<p>
      The first course was nearly over ere Augustus had brought himself to ask—
    </p>
<p>
      "What did you think of the sermon to-day, Letty?"
    </p>
<p>
      "Not much," answered Letty. "I am not fond of finery. I prefer
      simplicity."
    </p>
<p>
      Augustus held his peace bitterly. For it was just finery in a sermon,
      without knowing it, that Letty was fond of: what seemed to him a flimsy
      syllabub of sacred things, beaten up with the whisk of composition, was
      charming to Letty; while, on the contrary, if a man such as they had been
      listening to was carried away by the thoughts that struggled in him for
      utterance, the result, to her judgment, was finery, and the object
      display. In excuse it must be remembered that she had been used to her
      father's style, which no one could have aspersed with lack of sobriety.
      Presently she spoke again.
    </p>
<p>
      "Gus, dear, couldn't you make up your mind for once to go with me to Lady
      Ashdaile's to-morrow? I am getting quite ashamed of appearing so often
      without you."
    </p>
<p>
      "There is another way of avoiding that unpleasantness," remarked her
      husband drily.
    </p>
<p>
      "You cruel creature!" returned Letty playfully. "But I must go this once,
      for I promised Mrs. Holden."
    </p>
<p>
      "You know, Letty," said her husband, after a little pause, "it gets of
      more and more consequence that you should not fatigue yourself. By keeping
      such late hours in such stifling rooms you are endangering two lives—remember
      that, Letty. It you stay at home to-morrow, I will come home early, and
      read to you all the evening."
    </p>
<p>
      "Gussy, that <i>would</i> be charming. You <i>know</i> there is nothing in
      the world I should enjoy so much. But this time I really mustn't."
    </p>
<p>
      She launched into a list of all the great nobodies and small somebodies
      who were to be there, and whom she positively must see: it might be her
      only chance.
    </p>
<p>
      Those last words quenched a sarcasm on Augustus' lips. He was kinder than
      usual the rest of the evening, and read her to sleep with the Pilgrim's
      Progress.
    </p>
<p>
      Phosy sat in a corner, listened, and understood. Or where she
      misunderstood, it was an honest misunderstanding, which never does much
      hurt. Neither father nor mother spoke to her till they bade her good
      night. Neither saw the hungry heart under the mask of the still face. The
      father never imagined her already fit for the modelling she was better
      without, and the stepmother had to become a mother before she could value
      her.
    </p>
<p>
      Phosy went to bed to dream of the Valley of Humiliation.
    </p>
<p>

      <h2>
      CHAPTER II.
    </h2>
<p>
      The next morning Alice gave her mistress warning. It was quite unexpected,
      and she looked at her aghast.
    </p>
<p>
      "Alice," she said at length, "you're never going to leave me at such a
      time!"
    </p>
<p>
      "I'm sorry it don't suit you, ma'am, but I must."
    </p>
<p>
      "Why, Alice? What is the matter? Has Sophy been troublesome?"
    </p>
<p>
      "No, ma'am; there's no harm in that child."
    </p>
<p>
      "Then what can it be, Alice? Perhaps you are going to be married sooner
      than you expected?"
    </p>
<p>
      Alice gave her chin a little toss, pressed her lips together, and was
      silent.
    </p>
<p>
      "I have always been kind to you," resumed her mistress.
    </p>
<p>
      "I'm sure, ma'am, I never made no complaints!" returned Alice, but as she
      spoke she drew herself up straighter than before.
    </p>
<p>
      "Then what is it?" said her mistress.
    </p>
<p>
      "The fact is, ma'am," answered the girl, almost fiercely, "I <i>cannot</i>
      any longer endure a state of domestic slavery."
    </p>
<p>
      "I don't understand you a bit better," said Mrs. Greatorex, trying, but in
      vain, to smile, and therefore looking angrier than she was.
    </p>
<p>
      "I mean, ma'am—an' I see no reason as I shouldn't say it, for it's
      the truth—there's a worm at the root of society where one yuman
      bein' 's got to do the dirty work of another. I don't mind sweepin' up my
      own dust, but I won't sweep up nobody else's. I ain't a goin' to demean
      myself no longer! There!"
    </p>
<p>
      "Leave the room, Alice," said Mrs. Greatorex; and when, with a toss and a
      flounce, the young woman had vanished, she burst into tears of anger and
      annoyance.
    </p>
<p>
      The day passed. The evening came. She dressed without Alice's usual help,
      and went to Lady Ashdaile's with her friend. There a reaction took place,
      and her spirits rose unnaturally. She even danced—to the disgust of
      one or two quick-eyed matrons who sat by the wall.
    </p>
<p>
      When she came home she found her husband sitting up for her. He said next
      to nothing, and sat up an hour longer with his book.
    </p>
<p>
      In the night she was taken ill. Her husband called Alice, and ran himself
      to fetch the doctor. For some hours she seemed in danger, but by noon was
      much better. Only the greatest care was necessary.
    </p>
<p>
      As soon as she could speak, she told Augustus of Alice's warning, and he
      sent for her to the library.
    </p>
<p>
      She stood before him with flushed cheeks and flashing eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      "I understand, Alice, you have given your mistress warning," he said
      gently.
    </p>
<p>
      "Yes, sir."
    </p>
<p>
      "Your mistress is very ill, Alice."
    </p>
<p>
      "Yes, sir."
    </p>
<p>
      "Don't you think it would be ungrateful of you to leave her in her present
      condition? She's not likely to be strong for some time to come."
    </p>
<p>
      The use of the word "ungrateful" was an unfortunate one. Alice begged to
      know what she had to be grateful for. Was her work worth nothing? And her
      master, as every one must who claims that which can only be freely given,
      found himself in the wrong.
    </p>
<p>
      "Well, Alice," he said, "we won't dispute that point; and if you are
      really determined on going, you must do the best you can for your mistress
      for the rest of the month."
    </p>
<p>
      Alice's sense of injury was soothed by her master's forbearance. She had
      always rather approved of Mr. Greatorex, and she left the room more softly
      than she had entered it.
    </p>
<p>
      Letty had a fortnight in bed, during which she reflected a little.
    </p>
<p>
      The very day on which she left her room, Alice sought an interview with
      her master, and declared she could not stay out her month; she must go
      home at once.
    </p>
<p>
      She had been very attentive to her mistress during the fortnight: there
      must be something to account for her strange behaviour.
    </p>
<p>
      "Come now, Alice," said her master, "what's at the back of all this? You
      have been a good, well-behaved, obliging girl till now, and I am certain
      you would never be like this if there weren't something wrong somewhere."
    </p>
<p>
      "Something wrong, sir! No, indeed, sir! Except you call it wrong to have
      an old uncle 's dies and leaves ever so much money—thousands on
      thousands, the lawyers say."
    </p>
<p>
      "And does it come to you then, Alice?"
    </p>
<p>
      "I get my share, sir. He left it to be parted even between his nephews and
      nieces."
    </p>
<p>
      "Why, Alice, you are quite an heiress, then!" returned her master,
      scarcely however believing the thing so grand as Alice would have it. "But
      don't you think now it would be rather hard that your fortune should be
      Mrs. Greatorex's misfortune?"
    </p>
<p>
      "Well, I don't see as how it shouldn't," replied Alice. "It's mis'ess's
      fortun' as 'as been my misfortun'—ain't it now, sir? An' why
      shouldn't it be the other way next?"
    </p>
<p>
      "I don't quite see how your mistress's fortune can be said to be your
      misfortune, Alice."
    </p>
<p>
      "Anybody would see that, sir, as wasn't blinded by class-prejudices."
    </p>
<p>
      "Class-prejudices!" exclaimed Mr. Greatorex, in surprise at the word.
    </p>
<p>
      "It's a term they use, I believe, sir! But it's plain enough that if
      mis'ess hadn't 'a' been better off than me, she wouldn't ha' been able to
      secure my services—as you calls it."
    </p>
<p>
      "That is certainly plain enough," returned Mr. Greatorex. "But suppose
      nobody had been able to secure your services, what would have become of
      you?"
    </p>
<p>
      "By that time the people'd have rose to assert their rights."
    </p>
<p>
      "To what?—To fortunes like yours?"
    </p>
<p>
      "To bread and cheese at least, sir," returned Alice, pertly.
    </p>
<p>
      "Well, but you've had something better than bread and cheese."
    </p>
<p>
      "I don't make no complaints as to the style of livin' in the house, sir,
      but that's all one, so long as it's on the vile condition of domestic
      slavery—which it's nothing can justify."
    </p>
<p>
      "Then of course, although you are now a woman of property, you will never
      dream of having any one to wait on you," said her master, amused with the
      volume of human nature thus opened to him.
    </p>
<p>
      "All I say, sir, is—it's my turn now; and I ain't goin' to be sit
      upon by no one. I know my dooty to myself."
    </p>
<p>
      "I didn't know there was such a duty, Alice," said her master.
    </p>
<p>
      Something in his tone displeased her.
    </p>
<p>
      "Then you know now, sir," she said, and bounced out of the room.
    </p>
<p>
      The next moment, however, ashamed of her rudeness, she re-entered, saying,
    </p>
<p>
      "I don't want to be unkind, sir, but I must go home. I've got a brother
      that's ill, too, and wants to see me. If you don't object to me goin' home
      for a month, I promise you to come back and see mis'ess through her
      trouble—as a friend, you know, sir."
    </p>
<p>
      "But just listen to me first, Alice," said Mr. Greatorex. "I've had
      something to do with wills in my time, and I can assure you it is not
      likely to be less than a year before you can touch the money. You had much
      better stay where you are till your uncle's affairs are settled. You don't
      know what may happen. There's many a slip between cup and lip, you know."
    </p>
<p>
      "Oh! it's all right, sir. Everybody knows the money's left to his nephews
      and nieces, and me and my brother's as good as any."
    </p>
<p>
      "I don't doubt it: still, if you'll take my advice, you'll keep a sound
      roof over your head till another's ready for you."
    </p>
<p>
      Alice only threw her chin in the air, and said almost threateningly,
    </p>
<p>
      "Am I to go for the month, sir?"
    </p>
<p>
      "I'll talk to your mistress about it," answered Mr. Greatorex, not at all
      sure that such an arrangement would be for his wife's comfort.
    </p>
<p>
      But the next day Mrs. Greatorex had a long talk with Alice, and the result
      was that on the following Monday she was to go home for a month, and then
      return for two months more at least. What Mr. Greatorex had said about the
      legacy, had had its effect, and, besides, her mistress had spoken to her
      with pleasure in her good fortune. About Sophy no one felt any anxiety:
      she was no trouble to any one, and the housemaid would see to her.
    </p>
<p>

<h2>
      CHAPTER III.
    </h2>
<p>
      On the Sunday evening, Alice's lover, having heard, not from herself, but
      by a side wind, that she was going home the next day, made his appearance
      in Wimborne Square, somewhat perplexed—both at the move, and at her
      leaving him in ignorance of the same. He was a cabinet-maker in an honest
      shop in the neighbourhood, and in education, faculty, and general worth,
      considerably Alice's superior—a fact which had hitherto rather
      pleased her, but now gave zest to the change which she imagined had
      subverted their former relation. Full of the sense of her new superiority,
      she met him draped in an indescribable strangeness. John Jephson felt, at
      the very first word, as if her voice came from the other side of the
      English Channel. He wondered what he had done, or rather what Alice could
      imagine he had done or said, to put her in such tantrums.
    </p>
<p>
      "Alice, my dear," he said—for John was a man to go straight at the
      enemy, "what's amiss? What's come over you? You ain't altogether like your
      own self to-night! And here I find you're goin' away, and ne'er a word to
      me about it! What have I done?"
    </p>
<p>
      Alice's chin alone made reply. She waited the fitting moment, with
      splendour to astonish, and with grandeur to subdue her lover. To tell the
      sad truth, she was no longer sure that it would be well to encourage him
      on the old footing; was she not standing on tiptoe, her skirts in her
      hand, on the brink of the brook that parted serfdom from gentility, on the
      point of stepping daintily across, and leaving domestic slavery, red
      hands, caps, and obedience behind her? How then was she to marry a man
      that had black nails, and smelt of glue? It was incumbent on her at least,
      for propriety's sake, to render him at once aware that it was in
      condescension ineffable she took any notice of him.
    </p>
<p>
      "Alice, my girl!" began John again, in expostulatory tone.
    </p>
<p>
      "Miss Cox, if you please, John Jephson," interposed Alice.
    </p>
<p>
      "What on 'arth's come over you?" exclaimed John, with the first throb of
      rousing indignation. "But if you ain't your own self no more, why, Miss
      Cox be it. 'T seems to me 's if I warn't my own self no more—'s if
      I'd got into some un else, or 't least hedn't got my own ears on m' own
      head.—Never saw or heerd Alice like this afore!" he added, turning
      in gloomy bewilderment to the housemaid for a word of human sympathy.
    </p>
<p>
      The movement did not altogether please Alice, and she felt she must
      justify her behaviour.
    </p>
<p>
      "You see, John," she said, with dignity, keeping her back towards him, and
      pretending to dust the globe of a lamp, "there's things as no woman can
      help, and therefore as no man has no right to complain of them. It's not
      as if I'd gone an' done it, or changed myself, no more 'n if it 'ad took
      place in my cradle. What can I help it, if the world goes and changes
      itself? Am <i>I</i> to blame?—tell me that. It's not that. I make no
      complaint, but I tell you it ain't me, it's circumstances as is gone and
      changed theirselves, and bein' as circumstances is changed, things ain't
      the same as they was, and Miss is the properer term from you to me, John
      Jephson."
    </p>
<p>
      "Dang it if I know what you're a drivin' at, Alice!—Miss Cox!—and
      I beg yer pardon, miss, I'm sure.—Dang me if I do!"
    </p>
<p>
      "Don't swear, John Jephson—leastways before a lady. It's not
      proper."
    </p>
<p>
      "It seems to me, Miss Cox, as if the wind was a settin' from Bedlam, or
      may be Colney Hatch," said John, who was considered a humourist among his
      comrades. "I wouldn't take no liberties with a lady, Miss Cox; but if I
      might be so bold as to arst the joke of the thing—"
    </p>
<p>
      "Joke, indeed!" cried Alice. "Do you call a dead uncle and ten thousand
      pounds a joke?"
    </p>
<p>
      "God bless me!" said John. "You don't mean it, Alice?"
    </p>
<p>
      "I do mean it, and that you'll find, John Jephson. I'm goin' to bid you
      good-bye to-morrer."
    </p>
<p>
      "Whoy, Alice!" exclaimed honest John, aghast.
    </p>
<p>
      "It's truth I tell ye," said Alice.
    </p>
<p>
      "And for how long?" gasped John, fore-feeling illimitable misfortune.
    </p>
<p>
      "That depends," returned Alice, who did not care to lessen the effect of
      her communication by mentioning her promised return for a season. "—It
      ain't likely," she added, "as a heiress is a goin' to act the nuss-maid
      much longer."
    </p>
<p>
      "But Alice," said John, "you don't mean to say—it's not in your mind
      now—it can't be, Alice—you're only jokin' with me—"
    </p>
<p>
      "Indeed, and I'm not!" interjected Alice, with a sniff.
    </p>
<p>
      "I don't mean that way, you know. What I mean is, you don't mean as how
      this 'ere money—dang it all!—as how it's to be all over
      between you and me?—You <i>can't</i> mean that, Alice!" ended the
      poor fellow, with a choking in his throat.
    </p>
<p>
      It was very hard upon him! He must either look as if he wanted to share
      her money, or else as if he were ready to give her up.
    </p>
<p>
      "Arst yourself, John Jephson," answered Alice, "whether it's likely a
      young lady of fortun' would be keepin' company with a young man as didn't
      know how to take off his hat to her in the park?"
    </p>
<p>
      Alice did not above half mean what she said: she wished mainly to enhance
      her own importance. At the same time she did mean it half, and that would
      have been enough for Jephson. He rose, grievously wounded.
    </p>
<p>
      "Good-bye, Alice," he said, taking the hand she did not refuse. "Ye're
      throwin' from ye what all yer money won't buy."
    </p>
<p>
      She gave a scornful little laugh, and John walked out of the kitchen.
    </p>
<p>
      At the door he turned with one lingering look; but in Alice there was no
      sign of softening. She turned scornfully away, and no doubt enjoyed her
      triumph to the full.
    </p>
<p>
      The next morning she went away.
    </p>
<p>

<h2>
      CHAPTER IV.
    </h2>
<p>
      Mr. Greatorex had ceased to regard the advent of Christmas with much
      interest. Naturally gifted with a strong religious tendency, he had, since
      his first marriage, taken, not to denial, but to the side of objection,
      spending much energy in contempt for the foolish opinions of others, a
      self-indulgence which does less than little to further the growth of one's
      own spirit in truth and righteousness. The only person who stands excused—I
      do not say justified—in so doing, is the man who, having been taught
      the same opinions, has found them a legion of adversaries barring his way
      to the truth. But having got rid of them for himself, it is, I suspect,
      worse than useless to attack them again, save as the ally of those who are
      fighting their way through the same ranks to the truth. Greatorex had been
      indulging his intellect at the expense of his heart. A man may have light
      in the brain and darkness in the heart. It were better to be an owl than a
      strong-eyed apteryx. He was on the path which naturally ends in blindness
      and unbelief. I fancy, if he had not been neglectful of his child, she
      would ere this time have relighted his Christmas-candles for him; but now
      his second disappointment in marriage had so dulled his heart that he had
      begun to regard life as a stupid affair, in which the most enviable fool
      was the man who could still expect to realize an ideal. He had set out on
      a false track altogether, but had not yet discovered that there had been
      an immoral element at work in his mistake.
    </p>
<p>
      For what right had he to desire the fashioning of any woman after his
      ideas? did not the angel of her eternal Ideal for ever behold the face of
      her Father in heaven? The best that can be said for him is, that,
      notwithstanding his disappointment and her faults, yea, notwithstanding
      his own faults, which were, with all his cultivation and strength of
      character, yet more serious than hers, he was still kind to her; yes, I
      may say for him, that, notwithstanding even her silliness, which is a
      sickening fault, and one which no supremacy of beauty can overshadow, he
      still loved her a little. Hence the care he showed for her in respect of
      the coming sorrow was genuine; it did not all belong to his desire for a
      son to whom he might be a father indeed—after his own fancies,
      however. Letty, on her part, was as full of expectation as the girl who
      has been promised a doll that can shut and open its eyes, and cry when it
      is pinched; her carelessness of its safe arrival came of ignorance and not
      indifference.
    </p>
<p>
      It cannot but seem strange that such a man should have been so careless of
      the child he had. But from the first she had painfully reminded him of her
      mother, with whom in truth he had never quarrelled, but with whom he had
      not found life the less irksome on that account. Add to this that he had
      been growing fonder of business,—a fact which indicated, in a man of
      his endowment and development, an inclination downwards of the plane of
      his life. It was some time since he had given up reading poetry. History
      had almost followed: he now read little except politics, travels, and
      popular expositions of scientific progress.
    </p>
<p>
      That year Christmas Eve fell upon a Monday. The day before, Letty not
      feeling very well, her husband thought it better not to leave her, and
      gave up going to church. Phosy was utterly forgotten, but she dressed
      herself, and at the usual hour appeared with her prayer-book in her hand
      ready for church. When her father told her that he was not going, she
      looked so blank that he took pity upon her, and accompanied her to the
      church-door, promising to meet her as she came out. Phosy sighed from
      relief as she entered, for she had a vague idea that by going to church to
      pray for it she might move the Lord to chasten her. At least he would see
      her there, and might think of it. She had never had such an attention from
      her father before, never such dignity conferred upon her as to be allowed
      to appear in church alone, sitting in the pew by herself like a grown
      damsel. But I doubt if there was any pride in her stately step, or any
      vanity in the smile—no, not smile, but illuminated mist, the vapour
      of smiles, which haunted her sweet little solemn church-window of a face,
      as she walked up the aisle.
    </p>
<p>
      The preacher was one of whom she had never heard her father speak
      slighting word, in whom her unbounded trust had never been shaken. Also he
      was one who believed with his whole soul in the things that make Christmas
      precious. To him the birth of the wonderful baby hinted at hundreds of
      strange things in the economy of the planet. That a man could so
      thoroughly persuade himself that, he believed the old fable, was matter of
      marvel to some of his friends who held blind Nature the eternal mother,
      and Night the everlasting grandmother of all things. But the child Phosy,
      in her dreams or out of them, in church or nursery, with her book or her
      doll, was never out of the region of wonders, and would have believed, or
      tried to believe, anything that did not involve a moral impossibility.
    </p>
<p>
      What the preacher said I need not even partially repeat; it is enough to
      mention a certain metamorphosed deposit from the stream of his eloquence
      carried home in her mind by Phosy: from some of his sayings about the
      birth of Jesus into the world, into the family, into the individual human
      bosom, she had got it into her head that Christmas Day was not a birthday
      like that she had herself last year, but that, in some wonderful way, to
      her requiring no explanation, the baby Jesus was born every Christmas Day
      afresh. What became of him afterwards she did not know, and indeed she had
      never yet thought to ask how it was that he could come to every house in
      London as well as No. 1, Wimborne Square. Little of a home as another
      might think it, that house was yet to her the centre of all houses, and
      the wonder had not yet widened rippling beyond it: into that spot of the
      pool the eternal gift would fall.
    </p>
<p>
      Her father forgot the time over his book, but so entranced was her heart
      with the expectation of the promised visit, now so near—the day
      after to-morrow—that, if she did not altogether forget to look for
      him as she stepped down the stair from the church door to the street, his
      absence caused her no uneasiness; and when, just as she reached it, he
      opened the house-door in tardy haste to redeem his promise, she looked up
      at him with a solemn, smileless repose, born of spiritual tension and
      speechless anticipation, upon her face, and walking past him without
      change in the rhythm of her motion, marched stately up the stairs to the
      nursery. I believe the centre of her hope was that when the baby came she
      would beg him on her knees to ask the Lord to chasten her.
    </p>
<p>
      When dessert was over, her mother on the sofa in the drawing-room, and her
      father in an easy-chair, with a bottle of his favourite wine by his side,
      she crept out of the room and away again to the nursery. There she reached
      up to her little bookshelf, and, full of the sermon as spongy mists are
      full of the sunlight, took thence a volume of stories from the German, the
      re-reading of one of which, narrating the visit of the Christ-child, laden
      with gifts, to a certain household, and what he gave to each and all
      therein, she had, although sorely tempted, saved up until now, and sat
      down with it by the fire, the only light she had. When the housemaid,
      suddenly remembering she must put her to bed, and at the same time
      discovering it was a whole hour past her usual time, hurried to the
      nursery, she found her fast asleep in her little armchair, her book on her
      lap, and the fire self-consumed into a dark cave with a sombre glow in its
      deepest hollows. Dreams had doubtless come to deepen the impressions of
      sermon and <i>mährchen</i>, for as she slowly yielded to the hands of
      Polly putting her to bed, her lips, unconsciously moved of the slumbering
      but not sleeping spirit, more than once murmured the words <i>Lord loveth</i>
      and <i>chasteneth</i>. Right blessedly would I enter the dreams of such a
      child—revel in them, as a bee in the heavenly gulf of a
      cactus-flower.
    </p>
<p>


     <h2>
      CHAPTER V.
    </h2>
<p>
      On Christmas Eve the church bells were ringing through the murky air of
      London, whose streets lay flaring and steaming below. The brightest of
      their constellations were the butchers' shops, with their shows of prize
      beef; around them, the eddies of the human tides were most confused and
      knotted. But the toy-shops were brilliant also. To Phosy they would have
      been the treasure-caves of the Christ-child—all mysteries, all with
      insides to them—boxes, and desks, and windmills, and dove-cots, and
      hens with chickens, and who could tell what all? In every one of those
      shops her eyes would have searched for the Christ-child, the giver of all
      their wealth. For to her he was everywhere that night—ubiquitous as
      the luminous mist that brooded all over London—of which, however,
      she saw nothing but the glow above the mews. John Jephson was out in the
      middle of all the show, drifting about in it: he saw nothing that had
      pleasure in it, his heart was so heavy. He never thought once of the
      Christ-child, or even of the Christ-man, as the giver of anything. Birth
      is the one standing promise-hope for the race, but for poor John this
      Christmas held no promise. With all his humour, he was one of those
      people, generally dull and slow—God grant me and mine such dullness
      and such sloth—who having once loved, cannot cease. During the
      fortnight he had scarce had a moment's ease from the sting of his Alice's
      treatment. The honest fellow's feelings were no study to himself; he knew
      nothing but the pleasure and the pain of them; but, I believe it was not
      mainly for himself that he was sorry. Like Othello, "the pity of it"
      haunted him: he had taken Alice for a downright girl, about whom there was
      and could be no mistake; and the first hot blast of prosperity had swept
      her away like a hectic leaf. What were all the shops dressed out in holly
      and mistletoe, what were all the rushing flaming gas-jets, what the
      fattest of prize-pigs to John, who could never more imagine a spare-rib on
      the table between Alice and him of a Sunday? His imagination ran on seeing
      her pass in her carriage, and drop him a nod of condescension as she swept
      noisily by him—trudging home weary from his work to his loveless
      fireside. <i>He</i> didn't want her money! Honestly, he would rather have
      her without than with money, for he now regarded it as an enemy, seeing
      what evil changes it could work. "There be some devil in it, sure!" he
      said to himself. True, he had never found any in his week's wages, but he
      did remember once finding the devil in a month's wages received in the
      lump.
    </p>
<p>
      As he was thus thinking with himself, a carriage came suddenly from a side
      street into the crowd, and while he stared at it, thinking Alice might be
      sitting inside it while he was tramping the pavement alone, she passed him
      on the other side on foot—was actually pushed against him: he looked
      round, and saw a young woman, carrying a small bag, disappearing in the
      crowd. "There's an air of Alice about <i>her</i>" said John to himself,
      seeing her back only. But of course it couldn't be Alice; for her he must
      look in the carriages now! And what a fool he was: every young woman
      reminded him of the one he had lost! Perhaps if he was to call the next
      day—Polly was a good-natured creature—he might hear some news
      of her.
    </p>
<p>
      It had been a troubled fortnight with Mrs. Greatorex. She wished much that
      she could have talked to her husband more freely, but she had not learned
      to feel at home with him. Yet he had been kinder and more attentive than
      usual all the time, so much so that Letty thought with herself—if
      she gave him a boy, he would certainly return to his first devotion. She
      said <i>boy</i>, because any one might see he cared little for Phosy. She
      had never discovered that he was disappointed in herself, but, since her
      disregard of his wishes had brought evil upon her, she had begun to
      suspect that he had some ground for being dissatisfied with her. She never
      dreamed of his kindness as the effort of a conscientious nature to make
      the best of what could not now be otherwise helped. Her own poverty of
      spirit and lack of worth achieved, she knew as little of as she did of the
      riches of Michael the archangel. One must have begun to gather wisdom
      before he can see his own folly.
    </p>
<p>
      That evening she was seated alone in the drawing-room, her husband having
      left her to smoke his cigar, when the butler entered and informed her that
      Alice had returned, but was behaving so oddly that they did not know what
      to do with her. Asking wherein her oddness consisted, and learning that it
      was mostly in silence and tears, she was not sorry to gather that some
      disappointment had befallen her, and felt considerable curiosity to know
      what it was. She therefore told him to send her upstairs.
    </p>
<p>
      Meantime Polly, the housemaid, seeing plainly enough from her return in
      the middle of her holiday, and from her utter dejection, that Alice's
      expectations had been frustrated, and cherishing no little resentment
      against her because of her <i>uppishness</i> on the first news of her good
      fortune, had been ungenerous enough to take her revenge in a way as
      stinging in effect as bitter in intention; for she loudly protested that
      no amount of such luck as she pretended to suppose in Alice's possession,
      would have induced <i>her</i> to behave herself so that a handsome honest
      fellow like John Jephson should be driven to despise her, and take up with
      her betters. When her mistress's message came, Alice was only too glad to
      find refuge from the kitchen in the drawing-room.
    </p>
<p>
      The moment she entered, she fell on her knees at the foot of the couch on
      which her mistress lay, covered her face with her hands, and sobbed
      grievously.
    </p>
<p>
      Nor was the change more remarkable in her bearing than in her person. She
      was pale and worn, and had a hunted look—was in fact a mere shadow
      of what she had been. For a time her mistress found it impossible to quiet
      her so as to draw from her her story: tears and sobs combined with
      repugnance to hold her silent.
    </p>
<p>
      "Oh, ma'am!" she burst out at length, wringing her hands, "how ever <i>can</i>
      I tell you? You will never speak to me again. Little did I think such a
      disgrace was waiting me!"
    </p>
<p>
      "It was no fault of yours if you were misinformed," said her mistress, "or
      that your uncle was not the rich man you fancied."
    </p>
<p>
      "Oh, ma'am, there was no mistake there! He was more than twice as rich as
      I fancied. If he had only died a beggar, and left things as they was!"
    </p>
<p>
      "Then he didn't leave it to his nephews and nieces as they told you?—Well,
      there's no disgrace in that."
    </p>
<p>
      "Oh! but he did, ma'am: that was all right; no mistake there either,
      ma'am.—And to think o' me behavin' as I did—to you and master
      as was so good to me! Who'll ever take any more notice of me now, after
      what has come out—as I'm sure I no more dreamed on than the child
      unborn!"
    </p>
<p>
      An agonized burst of fresh weeping followed, and it was with prolonged
      difficulty, and by incessant questioning, that Mrs. Greatorex at length
      drew from her the following facts.
    </p>
<p>
      Before Alice and her brother could receive the legacy to which they laid
      claim, it was necessary to produce certain documents, the absence of
      which, as of any proof to take their place, led to the unavoidable
      publication of a fact previously known only to a living few—namely,
      that the father and mother of Alice Hopwood had never been married, which
      fact deprived them of the smallest claim on the legacy, and fell like a
      millstone upon Alice and her pride. From the height of her miserable
      arrogance she fell prone—not merely hurled back into the lowly
      condition from which she had raised her head only to despise it with base
      unrighteousness, and to adopt and reassert the principles she had abhorred
      when they affected herself—not merely this, but, in her own judgment
      at least, no longer the respectable member of society she had hitherto
      been justified in supposing herself. The relation of her father and mother
      she felt overshadow her with a disgrace unfathomable—the more
      overwhelming that it cast her from the gates of the Paradise she had
      seemed on the point of entering: her fall she measured by the height of
      the social ambition she had cherished, and had seemed on the point of
      attaining. But it is not an evil that the devil's money, which this legacy
      had from the first proved to Alice, should turn to a hot cinder in the
      hand. Rarely had a more haughty spirit than hers gone before a fall, and
      rarely has the fall been more sudden or more abject. And the consciousness
      of the behaviour into which her false riches had seduced her, changed the
      whip of her chastisement into scorpions. Worst of all, she had insulted
      her lover as beneath her notice, and the next moment had found herself too
      vile for his. Judging by herself, in the injustice of bitter humiliation
      she imagined him scoffing with his mates at the base-born menial who would
      set up for a fine lady. But had she been more worthy of honest John, she
      would have understood him better. As it was, no really good fortune could
      have befallen her but such as now seemed to her the depth of evil fortune.
      Without humiliation to prepare the way for humility, she must have become
      capable of more and more baseness, until she lost all that makes life
      worth having.
    </p>
<p>
      When Mrs. Greatorex had given her what consolation she found handy, and at
      length dismissed her, the girl, unable to endure her own company, sought
      the nursery, where she caught Sophy in her arms and embraced her with
      fervour. Never in her life having been the object of any such display of
      feeling, Phosy was much astonished: when Alice had set her down and she
      had resumed her seat by the fireside, she went on staring for a while—and
      then a strange sort of miming ensued.
    </p>
<p>
      It was Phosy's habit—one less rare with children than may by most be
      imagined—to do what she could to enter into any state of mind whose
      shows were sufficiently marked for her observation. She sought to lay hold
      of the feeling that produced the expression: less than the reproduction of
      a similar condition in her own imaginative sensorium, subject to her
      leisurely examination, would in no case satisfy the little metaphysician.
      But what was indeed very odd was the means she took for arriving at the
      sympathetic knowledge she desired. As if she had been the most earnest
      student of dramatic expression through the facial muscles, she would sit
      watching the countenance of the object of her solicitude, all the time,
      with full consciousness, fashioning her own as nearly as she could into
      the lines and forms of the other: in proportion as she succeeded, the
      small psychologist imagined she felt in herself the condition that
      produced the phenomenon she observed—as if the shape of her face
      cast inward its shadow upon her mind, and so revealed to it, through the
      two faces, what was moving and shaping in the mind of the other.
    </p>
<p>
      In the present instance, having at length, after modelling and remodelling
      her face like that of a gutta-percha doll for some time, composed it
      finally into the best correspondence she could effect, she sat brooding
      for a while, with Alice's expression as it were frozen upon it. Gradually
      the forms assumed melted away, and allowed her still, solemn face to look
      out from behind them. The moment this evanishment was complete, she rose
      and went to Alice, where she sat staring into the fire, unconscious of the
      scrutiny she had been undergoing, and, looking up in her face, took her
      thumb out of her mouth, and said,
    </p>
<p>
      "Is the Lord chastening Alice? I wish he would chasten Phosy."
    </p>
<p>
      Her face was calm as that of the Sphinx; there was no mist in the depth of
      her gray eyes, not a cloud on the wide heaven of her forehead.
    </p>
<p>
      Was the child crazed? What could the atom mean, with her big eyes looking
      right into her? Alice never had understood her: it were indeed strange if
      the less should comprehend the greater! She was not yet, capable of
      recognising the word of the Lord in the mouth of babes and sucklings. But
      there was a something in Phosy's face besides its calmness and
      unintelligibility. What it was Alice could never have told—yet it
      did her good. She lifted the child on her lap. There she soon fell asleep.
      Alice undressed her, laid her in her crib, and went to bed herself.
    </p>
<p>
      But, weary as she was, she had to rise again before she got to sleep. Her
      mistress was again taken ill. Doctor and nurse were sent for in hot haste;
      hansom cabs came and went throughout the night, like noisy moths to the
      one lighted house in the street; there were soft steps within, and doors
      were gently opened and shut. The waters of Mara had risen and filled the
      house.
    </p>
<p>
      Towards morning they were ebbing slowly away. Letty did not know that her
      husband was watching by her bedside. The street was quiet now. So was the
      house. Most of its people had been up throughout the night, but now they
      had all gone to bed except the strange nurse and Mr. Greatorex.
    </p>
<p>
      It was the morning of Christmas Day, and little Phosy knew it in every
      cranny of her soul. She was not of those who had been up all night, and
      now she was awake, early and wide, and the moment she awoke she was
      speculating: He was coming to-day—<i>how</i> would he come? Where
      should she find the baby Jesus? And when would he come? In the morning, or
      the afternoon, or in the evening? Could such a grief be in store for her
      as that he would not appear until night, when she would be again in bed?
      But she would not sleep till all hope was gone. Would everybody be
      gathered to meet him, or would he show himself to one after another, each
      alone? Then her turn would be last, and oh, if he would come to the
      nursery! But perhaps he would not appear to her at all!—for was she
      not one whom the Lord did not care to chasten?
    </p>
<p>
      Expectation grew and wrought in her until she could lie in bed no longer.
      Alice was fast asleep. It must be early, but whether it was yet light or
      not she could not tell for the curtains. Anyhow she would get up and
      dress, and then she would be ready for Jesus whenever he should come.
      True, she was not able to dress herself very well, but he would know, and
      would not mind. She made all the haste she could, consistently with taking
      pains, and was soon attired after a fashion.
    </p>
<p>
      She crept out of the room and down the stair. The house was very still.
      What if Jesus should come and find nobody awake? Would he go again and
      give them no presents? She couldn't expect any herself—but might he
      not let her take theirs for the rest? Perhaps she ought to wake them all,
      but she dared not without being sure.
    </p>
<p>
      On the last landing above the first floor, she saw, by the low gaslight at
      the end of the corridor, an unknown figure pass the foot of the stair:
      could she have anything to do with the marvel of the day? The woman looked
      up, and Phosy dropped the question. Yet she might be a charwoman, whose
      assistance the expected advent rendered necessary. When she reached the
      bottom of the stair she saw her disappearing in her step-mother's room.
      That she did not like. It was the one room into which she could not go.
      But, as the house was so still, she would search everywhere else, and if
      she did not find him, would then sit down in the hall and wait for him.
    </p>
<p>
      The room next the foot of the stair, and opposite her step-mother's, was
      the spare room, with which she associated ideas of state and grandeur:
      where better could she begin than at the guest-chamber?—There!—Could
      it be? Yes!—Through the chink of the scarce-closed door she saw
      light. Either he was already there or there they were expecting him. From
      that moment she felt as if lifted out of the body. Far exalted above all
      dread, she peeped modestly in, and then entered. Beyond the foot of the
      bed, a candle stood on a little low table, but nobody was to be seen.
      There was a stool near the table: she would sit on it by the candle, and
      wait for him. But ere she reached it, she caught sight of something upon
      the bed that drew her thither. She stood entranced.—<i>Could</i> it
      be?—It <i>might</i> be. Perhaps he had left it there while he went
      into her mamma's room with something for her.—The loveliest of dolls
      ever imagined! She drew nearer. The light was low, and the shadows were
      many: she could not be sure what it was. But when she had gone close up to
      it, she concluded with certainty that it was in very truth a doll—perhaps
      intended for her—but beyond doubt the most exquisite of dolls. She
      dragged a chair to the bed, got, up, pushed her little arms softly under
      it, and drawing it gently to her, slid down with it. When she felt her
      feet firm on the floor, filled with the solemn composure of holy awe she
      carried the gift of the child Jesus to the candle, that she might the
      better admire its beauty and know its preciousness. But the light had no
      sooner fallen upon it than a strange undefinable doubt awoke within her.
      Whatever it was, it was the very essence of loveliness—the tiny
      darling with its alabaster face, and its delicately modelled hands and
      fingers! A long night-gown covered all the rest.—Was it possible?—Could
      it be?—Yes, indeed! it must be—it could be nothing else than a
      <i>real</i> baby! What a goose she had been! Of course it was baby Jesus
      himself!—for was not this his very own Christmas Day on which he was
      always born?—If she had felt awe of his gift before, what a grandeur
      of adoring love, what a divine dignity possessed her, holding in her arms
      the very child himself! One shudder of bliss passed through her, and in an
      agony of possession she clasped the baby to her great heart—then at
      once became still with the satisfaction of eternity, with the peace of
      God. She sat down on the stool, near the little table, with her back to
      the candle, that its rays should not fall on the eyes of the sleeping
      Jesus and wake him: there she sat, lost in the very majesty of bliss, at
      once the mother and the slave of the Lord Jesus.
    </p>
<p>
      She sat for a time still as marble waiting for marble to awake, heedful as
      tenderest woman not to rouse him before his time, though her heart was
      swelling with the eager petition that he would ask his Father to be as
      good as chasten her. And as she sat, she began, after her wont, to model
      her face to the likeness of his, that she might understand his stillness—the
      absolute peace that dwelt on his countenance. But as she did so, again a
      sudden doubt invaded her: Jesus lay so very still—never moved, never
      opened his pale eye-lids! And now set thinking, she noted that he did not
      breathe. She had seen babies asleep, and their breath came and went—their
      little bosoms heaved up and down, and sometimes they would smile, and
      sometimes they would moan and sigh. But Jesus did none of all these
      things: was it not strange? And then he was cold—oh, so cold!
    </p>
<p>
      A blue silk coverlid lay on the bed: she half rose and dragged it off, and
      contrived to wind it around herself and the baby. Sad at heart, very sad,
      but undismayed, she sat and watched him on her lap.
    </p>
<p>

<h2>
      CHAPTER VI.
    </h2>
<p>
      Meantime the morning of Christmas Day grew. The light came and filled the
      house. The sleepers slept late, but at length they stirred. Alice awoke
      last—from a troubled sleep, in which the events of the night mingled
      with her own lost condition and destiny. After all Polly had been kind,
      she thought, and got Sophy up without disturbing her.
    </p>
<p>
      She had been but a few minutes down, when a strange and appalling rumour
      made itself—I cannot say audible, but—somehow known through
      the house, and every one hurried up in horrible dismay.
    </p>
<p>
      The nurse had gone into the spare room, and missed the little dead thing
      she had laid there. The bed was between her and Phosy, and she never saw
      her. The doctor had been sharp with her about something the night before:
      she now took her revenge in suspicion of him, and after a hasty and
      fruitless visit of inquiry to the kitchen, hurried to Mr. Greatorex.
    </p>
<p>
      The servants crowded to the spare room, and when their master, incredulous
      indeed, yet shocked at the tidings brought him, hastened to the spot, he
      found them all in the room, gathered at the foot of the bed. A little
      sunlight filtered through the red window-curtains, and gave a strange
      pallid expression to the flame of the candle, which had now burned very
      low. At first he saw nothing but the group of servants, silent,
      motionless, with heads leaning forward, intently gazing: he had come just
      in time: another moment and they would have ruined the lovely sight. He
      stepped forward, and saw Phosy, half shrouded in blue, the candle behind
      illuminating the hair she had found too rebellious to the brush, and
      making of it a faint aureole about her head and white face, whence cold
      and sorrow had driven all the flush, rendering it colourless as that upon
      her arm which had never seen the light. She had pored on the little face
      until she knew death, and now she sat a speechless mother of sorrow,
      bending in the dim light of the tomb over the body of her holy infant.
    </p>
<p>
      How it was I cannot tell, but the moment her father saw her she looked up,
      and the spell of her dumbness broke.
    </p>
<p>
      "Jesus is dead," she said, slowly and sadly, but with perfect calmness.
      "He is dead," she repeated. "He came too early, and there was no one up to
      take care of him, and he's dead—dead—dead!"
    </p>
<p>
      But as she spoke the last words, the frozen lump of agony gave way; the
      well of her heart suddenly filled, swelled, overflowed; the last word was
      half sob, half shriek of utter despair and loss.
    </p>
<p>
      Alice darted forward and took the dead baby tenderly from her. The same
      moment her father raised the little mother and clasped her to his bosom.
      Her arms went round his neck, her head sank on his shoulder, and sobbing
      in grievous misery, yet already a little comforted, he bore her from the
      room.
    </p>
<p>
      "No, no, Phosy!" they heard him say, "Jesus is not dead, thank God. It is
      only your little brother that hadn't life enough, and is gone back to God
      for more."
    </p>
<p>
      Weeping the women went down the stairs. Alice's tears were still flowing,
      when John Jephson entered. Her own troubles forgotten in the emotion of
      the scene she had just witnessed, she ran to his arms and wept on his
      bosom.
    </p>
<p>
      John stood as one astonished.
    </p>
<p>
      "O Lord! this <i>is</i> a Christmas!" he sighed at last.
    </p>
<p>
      "Oh John!" cried Alice, and tore herself from his embrace, "I forgot!
      You'll never speak to me again, John! Don't do it, John."
    </p>
<p>
      And with the words she gave a stifled cry, and fell a weeping again,
      behind her two shielding hands.
    </p>
<p>
      "Why, Alice!—you ain't married, are you?" gasped John, to whom that
      was the only possible evil.
    </p>
<p>
      "No, John, and never shall be: a respectable man like you would never
      think of looking twice at a poor girl like me!"
    </p>
<p>
      "Let's have one more look anyhow," said John, drawing her hands from her
      face. "Tell me what's the matter, and if there's anything can be done to
      right you, I'll work day and night to do it, Alice."
    </p>
<p>
      "There's nothing <i>can</i> be done, John," replied Alice, and would again
      have floated out on the ocean of her misery, but in spite of wind and
      tide, that is sobs and tears, she held on by the shore at his entreaty,
      and told her tale, not even omitting the fact that when she went to the
      eldest of the cousins, inheriting through the misfortune of her and her
      brother so much more than their expected share, and "demeaned herself" to
      beg a little help for her brother, who was dying of consumption, he had
      all but ordered her out of the house, swearing he had nothing to do with
      her or her brother, and saying she ought to be ashamed to show her face.
    </p>
<p>
      "And that when we used to make mud pies together!" concluded Alice with
      indignation. "There, John! you have it all," she added. "—And now?"
    </p>
<p>
      With the word she gave a deep, humbly questioning look into his honest
      eyes.
    </p>
<p>
      "Is that all, Alice?" he asked.
    </p>
<p>
      "Yes, John; ain't it enough?" she returned.
    </p>
<p>
      "More'n enough," answered John. "I swear to you, Alice, you're worth to me
      ten times what you would ha' been, even if you'd ha' had me, with ten
      thousand pounds in your ridicule. Why, my woman, I never saw you look one
      'alf so 'an'some as you do now!"
    </p>
<p>
      "But the disgrace of it, John!" said Alice, hanging her head, and so
      hiding the pleasure that would dawn through all the mist of her misery.
    </p>
<p>
      "Let your father and mother settle that betwixt 'em, Alice. 'Tain't none
      o' my business. Please God, we'll do different.—When shall it be, my
      girl?"
    </p>
<p>
      "When you like, John," answered Alice, without raising her head,
      thoughtfully.
    </p>
<p>
      When she had withdrawn herself from the too rigorous embrace with which he
      received her consent, she remarked—
    </p>
<p>
      "I do believe, John, money ain't a good thing! Sure as I live, with the
      very wind o' that money, the devil entered into me. Didn't you hate me,
      John? Speak the truth now."
    </p>
<p>
      "No, Alice. I did cry a bit over you, though. You <i>was</i> possessed
      like."
    </p>
<p>
      "I <i>was</i> possessed. I do believe if that money hadn't been took from
      me, I'd never ha' had you, John. Ain't it awful to think on?"
    </p>
<p>
      "Well, no. O' coorse! How could ye?" said Jephson—with reluctance.
    </p>
<p>
      "Now, John, don't ye talk like that, for I won't stand it. Don't you go
      for to set me up again with excusin' of me. I'm a nasty conceited cat, I
      am—and all for nothing but mean pride."
    </p>
<p>
      "Mind ye, ye're mine now, Alice; an' what's mine's mine, an' I won't have
      it abused. I knows you twice the woman you was afore, and all the world
      couldn't gi' me such another Christmas-box—no, not if it was all
      gold watches and roast beef."
    </p>
<p>
      When Mr. Greatorex returned to his wife's room, and thought to find her
      asleep as he had left her, he was dismayed to hear sounds of soft weeping
      from the bed. Some tone or stray word, never intended to reach her ear,
      had been enough to reveal the truth concerning her baby.
    </p>
<p>
      "Hush! hush!" he said, with more love in his heart than had moved there
      for many months, and therefore more in his tone than she had heard for as
      many;—"if you cry you will be ill. Hush, my dear!"
    </p>
<p>
      In a moment, ere he could prevent her, she had flung her arms around his
      neck as he stooped over her.
    </p>
<p>
      "Husband! husband!" she cried, "is it my fault?"
    </p>
<p>
      "You behaved perfectly," he returned. "No woman could have been braver."
    </p>
<p>
      "Ah, but I wouldn't stay at home when you wanted me."
    </p>
<p>
      "Never mind that now, my child," he said.
    </p>
<p>
      At the word she pulled his face down to hers.
    </p>
<p>
      "I have <i>you</i>, and I don't care," he added.
    </p>
<p>
      "<i>Do</i> you care to have me?" she said, with a sob that ended in a loud
      cry. "Oh! I don't deserve it. But I <i>will</i> be good after this. I
      promise you I will."
    </p>
<p>
      "Then you must begin now, my darling. You must lie perfectly still, and
      not cry a bit, or you will go after the baby, and I shall be left alone."
    </p>
<p>
      She looked up at him with such a light in her face as he had never dreamed
      of there before. He had never seen her so lovely. Then she withdrew her
      arms, repressed her tears, smiled, and turned her face away. He put her
      hands under the clothes, and in a minute or two she was again fast asleep.
    </p>
<p>

<h2>
      CHAPTER VII.
    </h2>
<p>
      That day, when Phosy and her father had sat down to their Christmas
      dinner, he rose again, and taking her up as she sat, chair and all, set
      her down close to him, on the other side of the corner of the table. It
      was the first of a new covenant between them. The father's eyes having
      been suddenly opened to her character and preciousness, as well as to his
      own neglected duty in regard to her, it was as if a well of life had burst
      forth at his feet. And every day, as he looked in her face and talked to
      her, it was with more and more respect for what he found in her, with
      growing tenderness for her predilections, and reverence for the divine
      idea enclosed in her ignorance, for her childish wisdom, and her calm
      seeking—until at length he would have been horrified at the thought
      of training her up in <i>his</i> way: had she not a way of her own to go—following—not
      the dead Jesus, but Him who liveth for evermore? In the endeavour to help
      her, he had to find his own position towards the truth; and the results
      were weighty.—Nor did the child's influence work forward merely. In
      his intercourse with her he was so often reminded of his first wife, and
      that, with the gloss or comment of a childish reproduction, that his
      memories of her at length grew a little tender, and through the child he
      began to understand the nature and worth of the mother. In her child she
      had given him what she could not be herself. Unable to keep up with him,
      she had handed him her baby, and dropped on the path.
    </p>
<p>
      Nor was little Sophy his only comfort. Through their common loss and her
      husband's tenderness, Letty began to grow a woman. And her growth was the
      more rapid that, himself taught through Phosy, her husband no longer
      desired to make her adopt his tastes, and judge with his experiences, but,
      as became the elder and the tried, entered into her tastes and experiences—became,
      as it were, a child again with her, that, through the thing she was, he
      might help the thing she had to be.
    </p>
<p>
      As soon as she was able to bear it, he told her the story of the dead
      Jesus, and with the tale came to her heart love for Phosy. She had lost a
      son for a season, but she had gained a daughter for ever.
    </p>
<p>
      Such were the gifts the Christ-child brought to one household that
      Christmas. And the days of the mourning of that household were ended.
    </p>
