<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>II</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-2" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</h2>
			<p>The next morning Alice gave her mistress warning. It was quite unexpected, and she looked at her aghast.</p>
			<p>“Alice,” she said at length, “you’re never going to leave me at such a time!”</p>
			<p>“I’m sorry it don’t suit you, ma’am, but I must.”</p>
			<p>“Why, Alice? What is the matter? Has Sophy been troublesome?”</p>
			<p>“No, ma’am; there’s no harm in that child.”</p>
			<p>“Then what can it be, Alice? Perhaps you are going to be married sooner than you expected?”</p>
			<p>Alice gave her chin a little toss, pressed her lips together, and was silent.</p>
			<p>“I have always been kind to you,” resumed her mistress.</p>
			<p>“I’m sure, ma’am, I never made no complaints!” returned Alice, but as she spoke she drew herself up straighter than before.</p>
			<p>“Then what is it?” said her mistress.</p>
			<p>“The fact is, ma’am,” answered the girl, almost fiercely, “I <i>cannot</i> any longer endure a state of domestic slavery.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t understand you a bit better,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Greatorex, trying, but in vain, to smile, and therefore looking angrier than she was.</p>
			<p>“I mean, ma’am⁠—an’ I see no reason as I shouldn’t say it, for it’s the truth⁠—there’s a worm at the root of society where one yuman bein’ ’s got to do the dirty work of another. I don’t mind sweepin’ up my own dust, but I won’t sweep up nobody else’s. I ain’t a goin’ to demean myself no longer! There!”</p>
			<p>“Leave the room, Alice,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Greatorex; and when, with a toss and a flounce, the young woman had vanished, she burst into tears of anger and annoyance.</p>
			<p>The day passed. The evening came. She dressed without Alice’s usual help, and went to Lady Ashdaile’s with her friend. There a reaction took place, and her spirits rose unnaturally. She even danced⁠—to the disgust of one or two quick-eyed matrons who sat by the wall.</p>
			<p>When she came home she found her husband sitting up for her. He said next to nothing, and sat up an hour longer with his book.</p>
			<p>In the night she was taken ill. Her husband called Alice, and ran himself to fetch the doctor. For some hours she seemed in danger, but by noon was much better. Only the greatest care was necessary.</p>
			<p>As soon as she could speak, she told Augustus of Alice’s warning, and he sent for her to the library.</p>
			<p>She stood before him with flushed cheeks and flashing eyes.</p>
			<p>“I understand, Alice, you have given your mistress warning,” he said gently.</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Your mistress is very ill, Alice.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, sir.”</p>
			<p>“Don’t you think it would be ungrateful of you to leave her in her present condition? She’s not likely to be strong for some time to come.”</p>
			<p>The use of the word “ungrateful” was an unfortunate one. Alice begged to know what she had to be grateful for. Was her work worth nothing? And her master, as every one must who claims that which can only be freely given, found himself in the wrong.</p>
			<p>“Well, Alice,” he said, “we won’t dispute that point; and if you are really determined on going, you must do the best you can for your mistress for the rest of the month.”</p>
			<p>Alice’s sense of injury was soothed by her master’s forbearance. She had always rather approved of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Greatorex, and she left the room more softly than she had entered it.</p>
			<p>Letty had a fortnight in bed, during which she reflected a little.</p>
			<p>The very day on which she left her room, Alice sought an interview with her master, and declared she could not stay out her month; she must go home at once.</p>
			<p>She had been very attentive to her mistress during the fortnight: there must be something to account for her strange behaviour.</p>
			<p>“Come now, Alice,” said her master, “what’s at the back of all this? You have been a good, well-behaved, obliging girl till now, and I am certain you would never be like this if there weren’t something wrong somewhere.”</p>
			<p>“Something wrong, sir! No, indeed, sir! Except you call it wrong to have an old uncle ’s dies and leaves ever so much money⁠—thousands on thousands, the lawyers say.”</p>
			<p>“And does it come to you then, Alice?”</p>
			<p>“I get my share, sir. He left it to be parted even between his nephews and nieces.”</p>
			<p>“Why, Alice, you are quite an heiress, then!” returned her master, scarcely however believing the thing so grand as Alice would have it. “But don’t you think now it would be rather hard that your fortune should be <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Greatorex’s misfortune?”</p>
			<p>“Well, I don’t see as how it shouldn’t,” replied Alice. “It’s mis’ess’s fortun’ as ’as been my misfortun’⁠—ain’t it now, sir? An’ why shouldn’t it be the other way next?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t quite see how your mistress’s fortune can be said to be your misfortune, Alice.”</p>
			<p>“Anybody would see that, sir, as wasn’t blinded by class-prejudices.”</p>
			<p>“Class-prejudices!” exclaimed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Greatorex, in surprise at the word.</p>
			<p>“It’s a term they use, I believe, sir! But it’s plain enough that if mis’ess hadn’t ’a’ been better off than me, she wouldn’t ha’ been able to secure my services⁠—as you calls it.”</p>
			<p>“That is certainly plain enough,” returned <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Greatorex. “But suppose nobody had been able to secure your services, what would have become of you?”</p>
			<p>“By that time the people’d have rose to assert their rights.”</p>
			<p>“To what?⁠—To fortunes like yours?”</p>
			<p>“To bread and cheese at least, sir,” returned Alice, pertly.</p>
			<p>“Well, but you’ve had something better than bread and cheese.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t make no complaints as to the style of livin’ in the house, sir, but that’s all one, so long as it’s on the vile condition of domestic slavery⁠—which it’s nothing can justify.”</p>
			<p>“Then of course, although you are now a woman of property, you will never dream of having any one to wait on you,” said her master, amused with the volume of human nature thus opened to him.</p>
			<p>“All I say, sir, is⁠—it’s my turn now; and I ain’t goin’ to be sit upon by no one. I know my dooty to myself.”</p>
			<p>“I didn’t know there was such a duty, Alice,” said her master.</p>
			<p>Something in his tone displeased her.</p>
			<p>“Then you know now, sir,” she said, and bounced out of the room.</p>
			<p>The next moment, however, ashamed of her rudeness, she re-entered, saying,</p>
			<p>“I don’t want to be unkind, sir, but I must go home. I’ve got a brother that’s ill, too, and wants to see me. If you don’t object to me goin’ home for a month, I promise you to come back and see mis’ess through her trouble⁠—as a friend, you know, sir.”</p>
			<p>“But just listen to me first, Alice,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Greatorex. “I’ve had something to do with wills in my time, and I can assure you it is not likely to be less than a year before you can touch the money. You had much better stay where you are till your uncle’s affairs are settled. You don’t know what may happen. There’s many a slip between cup and lip, you know.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! it’s all right, sir. Everybody knows the money’s left to his nephews and nieces, and me and my brother’s as good as any.”</p>
			<p>“I don’t doubt it: still, if you’ll take my advice, you’ll keep a sound roof over your head till another’s ready for you.”</p>
			<p>Alice only threw her chin in the air, and said almost threateningly,</p>
			<p>“Am I to go for the month, sir?”</p>
			<p>“I’ll talk to your mistress about it,” answered <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Greatorex, not at all sure that such an arrangement would be for his wife’s comfort.</p>
			<p>But the next day <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Greatorex had a long talk with Alice, and the result was that on the following Monday she was to go home for a month, and then return for two months more at least. What <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Greatorex had said about the legacy, had had its effect, and, besides, her mistress had spoken to her with pleasure in her good fortune. About Sophy no one felt any anxiety: she was no trouble to any one, and the housemaid would see to her.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
